.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, before:

## Wiki PR Checklist

Thank you for contributing to the Protocol Wiki! Before you open a PR, make sure to read [information for contributors](https://epf.wiki/#/contributing) and take a look at following checklist:

- [ ] Describe your changes, substitute this text with the information
- [ ] If you need feedback for your content from wider community, share the PR in our Discord
- [ ] Review changes to ensure there are no typos, see instructions bellow

<!--
ℹ️ Checking for typos locally
1. Install [aspell](https://www.gnu.org/software/aspell/) for your platform.
2. Navigate to the project root and run:
```
 for f in **/*.md ; do echo $f ; aspell --lang=en_US --mode=markdown --home-dir=. --personal=wordlist.txt --ignore-case=true --camel-case --add-sgml-skip name list < $f | sort | uniq -c ; done
```

ℹ️ Fixing typos
1. Fix typos: Open the relevant files and fix any identified typos.
2. Update wordlist: If a flagged word is actually a project-specific term add it to `wordlist.txt` in the project root.
   Each word should be listed on a separate line.
 * 🚧 Remember:
    * When adding new words it must NOT have any spaces or special characters within or around it.
    * \`wordlist\` is NOT case sensitive.
    * Use backticks to quote code variables so as to not bloat the \`wordlist\`.
-->

Commit message:

ask review from relevant maintainer

.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md, after:

## Wiki PR Checklist

Thank you for contributing to the Protocol Wiki! Before you open a PR, make sure to read [information for contributors](https://epf.wiki/#/contributing) and take a look at following checklist:

- [ ] Describe your changes, substitute this text with the information
- [ ] If you are touching an existing piece of content, ask the [relevant maintainer](https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies/blob/maintainers/README.md#wiki-maintainers) for review
- [ ] If you need feedback for your content from wider community, share the PR in our Discord
- [ ] Review changes to ensure there are no typos, see instructions bellow

<!--
ℹ️ Checking for typos locally
1. Install [aspell](https://www.gnu.org/software/aspell/) for your platform.
2. Navigate to the project root and run:
```
 for f in **/*.md ; do echo $f ; aspell --lang=en_US --mode=markdown --home-dir=. --personal=wordlist.txt --ignore-case=true --camel-case --add-sgml-skip name list < $f | sort | uniq -c ; done
```

ℹ️ Fixing typos
1. Fix typos: Open the relevant files and fix any identified typos.
2. Update wordlist: If a flagged word is actually a project-specific term add it to `wordlist.txt` in the project root.
   Each word should be listed on a separate line.
 * 🚧 Remember:
    * When adding new words it must NOT have any spaces or special characters within or around it.
    * \`wordlist\` is NOT case sensitive.
    * Use backticks to quote code variables so as to not bloat the \`wordlist\`.
-->
