# Wiki Contributors Meeting #1 - April 18, 2024 (5PM UTC)

## Agenda

- Current state of the wiki, issues, PRs
- Feedback from contributors, share your perspective
- Discuss and come up with tasks to accomplish, filling content gaps
- Future of the wiki

## Participants

- Angus
- Aritra
- Gorondan
- Kira
- Mario
- meldsun0
- Nagu
- Rahul
- Rory
- Siddharth

## Notes

### Current State of the Wiki and Contributing

- Mario shared the goals behind developing EPF WIKI. Mario noted the high quality of contributions thus far.
- Kira sees the wiki as a repository to document their learning. They are currently working on Prism client and consensus layer. Overlapping content during collaboration was identified as a point of friction.
- Gorondan emphasized the importance of improved collaboration to expedite completion of open PRs.
- Aritra suggested that pre-agreed upon document flow could lead to better collaboration.
- Rory wondered how to encourage more people to contribute.
- meldsun0 suggested potential reasons for contributor hesitancy, such as difficulty using GitHub. They proposed reaching out to encourage more active participation.
- Mario acknowledged that the contributing.md document might be overwhelming. He asked for further input on the state of the wiki and contributing experience.
- Kira suggested checking for existing content before contributing new sections. Mario confirmed this will be highlighted in the contributing.md document.
- The landing page was discussed as a potential barrier to entry. Mario suggested improvements and mentioned promoting the wiki once closer to completion.
- Gorondan proposed promoting the wiki to raise awareness and encourage contributions. Mario agreed and suggested a meetup to share the project.

### Previous Cohorts and Contributing Experience

- Rory inquired about previous cohort involvement with the wiki. Mario confirmed this is the first cohort to work on the wiki. While other cohorts have created content, it's not centrally collected. He hopes this wiki serves as a foundation for future cohorts.
- Rory suggested mimicking the core developer experience with breakout rooms for wiki contribution.
- meldsun0 proposed assigning section ownership. Mario found it an interesting idea but unsure if anyone's willing to take ownership.
- Aritra expressed interest in owning the consensus layer section, finding the approach appealing.
- Gorondan suggested approaching the wiki as a collaborative project to collectively complete it. Mario agreed and encouraged volunteers to claim responsibility for sections.
- Rory expressed interest in contributing to the testing section.

### Open Issues, Roadmap, and Content Gaps

- Gorondan mentioned his PR on the roadmap and received positive feedback from Mario, who encouraged continued work on it.
- Mario suggested working on open issues and identifying content gaps. While "boring" topics like client overviews are essential for beginners, focusing on these areas was suggested.
- Gorondan expressed willingness to work on client documentation.
- Rahul suggested to include a section about EIPs. Mario confirmed he would add that.
- Sid mentioned el-architecture as a topic he is working on.
- Kira indicated they would submit PRs for sections of interest shortly. Mario mentioned opening more issues later. Everyone was encouraged to comment on existing issues or create new ones.
- Mario acknowledged the importance of bridging basic gaps, mentioning a dependency tree. He emphasized covering foundational topics to provide a starting point for users.
- Originally hoping to have the wiki ready by the end of the study group, Mario acknowledged it might take longer. A target of mid-May was proposed to assess progress and prepare for public promotion.

### Closing Thoughts

- To maintain the wiki, Mario suggested continuing these calls, proposing bi-weekly meetings. Timezone preferences were discussed, with most favoring bi-weekly meetings.
- Gorondan raised the challenge of using links in open PRs and suggested faster PR merging. Mario explained the option to fetch updates from upstream but acknowledged considering faster merging. He identified himself as a potential bottleneck and encouraged pinging him to expedite reviews.
- Nagu suggested using reference wikis as a last pass for additional edits once the content is mostly complete. They also inquired about delegating tasks from Mario's workload.
- Mario welcomed assistance with reviewing existing content and onboarding new contributors.
- Nagu proposed cross-posting PRs in the wiki-writers group to encourage reviews. Mario confirmed the GitHub bot already serves this purpose.

## Next Steps

- Interested contributors can claim ownership of sections.
- Finalize the meeting schedule, aiming for bi-weekly.
- Contributors are encouraged to open issues for missing content.

## Meta

For every meeting, create a new file inside `/notes/wiki_contributors_meeting` using the convention `YYYY-MM-DD_description.md`; eg.`2024-04-01_kickoff_call.md`. This helps preserve chronological order when sorting files.
