# Wiki Contributors Meeting #3 - May 16, 2024 (4PM UTC)

## Agenda

- Progress since last call, reflecting on the current state of the wiki
  - Active issues and PRs
- Sharing the wiki publicly
  - Continue the conversation on versioning
  - Channels to share the wiki

## Participants

- Asli
- Gorondan
- Kira
- Mario
- Nagu
- Rahul
- Siddharth
- @meldsun

## Notes

Rory is currently working on testing, specifically with an emphasis on hive. Mario stated that Mario Vega is the leading authority on hive, and Rory has already established contact with him regarding that subject. In addition, @faytey will be making a contribution to the testing page. She is acquainted with Rory and they had a meeting regarding the topic one day prior to the wiki contributors meeting. In addition, she desires to make a contribution to the cryptography page.

Mario informed that the EPF applications are now open. However, it should be noted that contributing to the wiki and participating in the study group does not guarantee a stipend for the EPF. Nevertheless, all contributors are strongly encouraged to apply, as it can still be advantageous even if they do not receive a stipend.

Varun asked about a page dedicated to attacks and requested clarification on the specific types of attacks it should include. Mario suggested including information about the Shanghai attacks and organizing the content across multiple pages. The History page should make a reference to the incidents page, which in turn should make a reference to the evolution page.

Kira stated that he is currently engaged in the development of consensus layer pages and anticipates having a deliverable by the following week.

After completing his project proposal, Dan will subsequently focus on working on the SSF page. In addition, Dan raised the concern regarding the incorrect rendering of tables. A front end developer, who is familiar to him, suggested setting the CSS property overflow to auto. Mario suggested that the solution should be shared in a publicly accessible manner, such as through a Github branch or pull request.

@asli suggested a solution for the builders/searchers issue. A pull request will be initiated shortly to address this.

@hopinheimer is currently working on the protocol design page, and @meldsun will also be involved in this task.

Mario raised the concern that the sidebar disappears on smaller screens, and the close button does not appear on certain devices. In addition, he stated that the issues should be included in the release version of the GitHub project and recommended that we create a release milestone prior to the initiation of the EPF. Subsequently, he proposed the idea of sharing the wiki and inquired about the preferred communication channels to be utilized. Dan proposed utilizing our personal channels and networks to distribute the wiki, and he plans to set up farcaster for wider dissemination. Mario mentioned that he has already shared it on Twitter, in face-to-face conversations with core developers, and in the R&D discord channel. And As Dan suggested, we should also individually share it through our own channels and accounts. In addition, Mario conveyed some of the feedback, which was predominantly positive, but there were a few negative comments regarding a perceived LLM influence in certain content.
