# Wiki Contributors Meeting #5 - Jul 25, 2024 (3 PM UTC)

## Agenda

- State of the wiki; items in progress since the last call
- Clarify Purpose and Intent of Source Code Mirror #297
- EPF contributions

## Participants

- Caleb
- Dan
- Glory
- Hopinheimer
- Katya
- Kira
- Mayowa
- Mario
- Rahul
- Sid

## Notes

**Mario**: We released wiki [version 1.0.2](https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies/commit/ef0b7597261dde7706a2e5f5a34b53b74b530d0d) with the history page, DHT, and information about Grandine. Contributions have slowed down a bit, but that is expected because folks are busy with EPF. There are several pull requests pending. Let's start with Kira's pull request on the consensus layer.

**Kira**: I have considered most feedback and think the PR is ready for review.

**Rahul**: It looks good to me.

**Mario**: I will review it once more and merge it. I think the spell check is broken.

**Kira**: I fixed it in my PR.

**Mario**: Great. I think the style guide can be a separate page.

**Rahul**: Agreed. I will create a new page for it.

**Dan**: I think the roadmap is still open, but it is a good first issue for new contributors.

**Mario**: Agreed. We should get new contributors to work on it.

**Dan**: Maybe we should let EPF fellows know that they could contribute their work to the wiki.

**Mario**: Yep. I don’t think it’s too much overhead.

**Katya**: Propose it in the office hours. The first call where it was mentioned had introductions, so it’s possible that folks missed the part about contributing to the wiki.

**Mario**: Yeah, we need to reiterate the message.

**Rahul**: At the very least, we could ask folks to create an issue about their project and dump resources, allowing other contributors to work on it.

**Dan**: Reviewing pull requests is a bottleneck. How can we get more contributors?

**Mario**: Anybody can review PRs, but I agree we need more reviewers.

**Rahul**: Contributors need incentives.

**Mario**: Yes, but we don’t want to promote low-quality contributions. We have aspiring new contributors—Katya and Mayowa.

**Katya**: I would love to contribute about Kurtosis and Grafana. I have some cheat sheets that I can share, extracted from videos that really save time.

**Mario**: We would love to have that. Feel free to issue and create a PR. It’s fully permissionless. It overlaps with DevOps, so maybe we should create a separate page.

**Dan**: Tim recently published [EIP 7723](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-7723.md) about activation on an EIP.

**Mario**: We don’t have the EIP process documented. We should create one based on [Tim’s talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5L9UUCL7bzI). There is also a [great blog post](https://medium.com/ethereum-magicians/comprehensive-guide-on-writing-and-submitting-an-eip-9474163771f0) that discusses this, though it could be a little outdated.

**Caleb**: I'm working on EPBs with Kira. I realize that most people don’t know how to start with EIPs. I would like to write an article on how to implement an EIP.

**Mario**: I think that’s great and even more important than proposing an EIP itself. Please open an issue.

**Hopinheimer**: Asking core devs for advice on getting started would also be valuable. I would like to gather some feedback and include that in the wiki.

**Mario**: Yeah, we are doing AMAs as part of EPF office hours; we could include that as part of a wiki page. There is also a great [talk by Danny Ryan](https://streameth.org/devconnect/watch?session=65b8f8cfa5b2d09b88ec114b) that might be useful.

**Dan**: On that note, we should collaborate with [Ethereum Cat Herders](https://www.ethereumcatherders.com/) and [Pooja](https://twitter.com/poojaranjan19). She is very active.

**Mario**: Yes, we should have Pooja do an AMA. Also, feel free to suggest guests for upcoming AMAs.

**Mario**: Glory, do you have any comments on your contribution?

**Glory**: I will continue working on the assigned issue.

**Mario**: Regarding mirroring, I could ask EF DevOps to add the wiki to their mirroring workflow. But we should also look into something like [Radicle](https://app.radicle.xyz/nodes/seed.radicle.xyz).

**Dan**: I could help you with that.

**Mario**: Sounds great. That’s all for now. Thanks, everyone.
