# Wiki Contributors Meeting #6 - Jan 23, 2025 (5 PM UTC)

## Agenda

### Intro 
EPFsg 2025 cohort will begin in about 3 weeks (17 Feb - mid April). 

Mario drops some alpha about the new SG format ‚ú®:

While contributing will be permissionless, as always, this time, wiki-contributors will be invited to be the reviewers of new content produced by the SG students. In a way, the wiki-contributors will be the mentors of the 2025 EPS students, as protocol devs are the mentors of EPF fellows. Mario will coordinate and do the heavy lifting, but wiki-contributors are invited to assist. Also, contributors will probably be invited to conferences and meetups.

### High-level view of the new SG schedule
- In the first part, new students will focus on existing Wiki content, deep diving in different protocol-related topics.
- In the second part, new students will focus on writing fresh Wiki content, being reviewed by Mario and Wiki-contributors.

### Details on the 2025 SG schedule
The new EPF study-group will be 8 weeks long instead of 10 as the previous.

- First 2 weeks: intense study on the existing content
    - 1st week will cover the first 5 weeks of the previous SG, then, the 2nd week will cover weeks 5-10. 
    
        Every day a call - Mario & Josh plus us, Wiki-contributors as guests, focusing on individual weeks of the first SG. Students will watch the 2024 recordings, following up with discussions, then new people can update the existing content / add new content. Intense 10 days! üëè 


- Next 5 weeks, 2 calls per week (sometimes 3 calls per week), divided into 2 tracks: Execution track and Consensus track, alternatively.
- Last week will be reserved for SG wrap up.

Mario will publish the actual schedule and content for coordination.

## TODOs before EPFsg starts
We should close open issues and merge existing PRs. The focus should be on tying up loose ends rather than spending too much time on writing long content.

### Existing PRs and issues 
- Mario will work on the Wiki style guide issue, and he remembers that it was decided to only use dark background.
- Rahul will create a PR for 7702 (Mario recommends to connect with protocol people like Felix to help, the page should not be too complex though).
- Kira will work on ePBS and FOCIL. Mario suggests that Katya and Dan could help.
- Hopenheimer and Mario will work on "Advice for Core Devs." However, this page is more relevant for the fellowship, so it's a lower priority. Let's focus on adding more technical content.
- The roadmap page is still pending. It doesn‚Äôt need to be a catch-all page for the roadmap, but it‚Äôs important to have it as part of the wiki.
- Dan will add a stub page for Confirmation rule, and add it to the roadmap. Mario advises to mention it and add minimal content for now (high-level content and links).
- Hopenheimer suggested adding a page on the gossip protocol. Potuz has published content related to CL networking (RLNC). We might link to Potuz's content (https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies/blob/main/docs/wiki/CL/cl-networking.md).
- PeerDAS is missing. Katya has volunteered to create a page under CL. EthPrague has some resources for PeerDAS. Mario suggests creating a small page, so new contributors have the opportunity to expand on it.
- Katya has a PR on Kurtosis and there‚Äôs a spell-check issue. Rahul will highlight why the spell check fails. Mario commented that the PR should be reviewed by following the tutorial to double-check for any mistakes.
- Rahul will update the PR for markdown formatting.
- Chirag is not present, but Mario had a call with him to review his PR.
- Dan wants to add a consolidated consensus spec as part of the content he's been working on. Mario suggests adding it to the Week 6 development track or perhaps including it in the relevant section of the wiki (CL specs). Also add https://jtraglia.github.io/eth-spec-viewer/ as resource.
- PR #287 is a UI issue on Mac. Katya will check if the issue is reproducible on Mac (Brave browser).
- Meldsun has a work-in-progress PR on validator duties. It would be nice to include it as part of CL. It needs some minor updates, so feel free to keep it simple and merge it.
- Katya suggests that we should create a page for the Beam Chain.
- Sid has suggested creating a page on EOF. Perhaps create an issue?
- Bastin suggests adding "[purified web3](https://purified-web3.box/)".
- The recent DevCon has some awesome content, maybe link them.
- Hopenheimer highlighted an issue with the wiki menu; and PR'ed a fix while on this call. (WHOA üëÄ)

### Adding new content
The Wiki-contributors should start Wiki pages stubs with the intent to cover as many protocol topics as possible and focus on their work on actual protocol development, sticking to reviewing the new content written by students.
Last year we started from scratch, this time the EPFsg will build on that.

## Wiki improvement proposals

The sections separators (dotted lines) seems confusing to Katya. 
Mario clears it: 
- study group is for mentors and presenters
- the protocol wiki is for the contributors

The titles of the groups could be different color says Rahul, or centered (Mario).

## Wiki releases

Dan: any plans regarding the wiki releases?
Mario: the main update will be released before the next SG, maybe before the 15th of February.

## Session ends

**Mario**: Great to see each other again and sync on the status of Wiki.





