docs/wiki/dev/pm.md, before:

# Core development coordination 

Because of the approach of client diversity and decentralization, Ethereum core development is spread across many teams from various organizations. Roughly estimated, there is around 200+ client developers, researchers, testers and other contributors split across ~20 teams. 

To effectively maintain and implement various initiatives affecting the Ethereum protocol, all of these people need be able to reach consensus and collaborate in a productive manner. Generally, this is possible thanks to free and open source nature of Ethereum and it's design and development based unix philosophy but still requires lot of coordination work. 

## Ethereum PM repository

The [ethereum/pm](https://github.com/ethereum/pm) repository is used for Ethereum project management purposes. It serves as a coordination for planning developer calls and archiving their recordings. 

*main use:*
 - Execution and Consensus Layer AllCoreDevs meetings

*secondary uses:*
 - Breakout Rooms on various protocol-related topics (e.g. EOF, account abstraction, etc)
 - There's a Google Calendar tracking upcoming protocol meetings.

### Resources

[Ethereum Governance by Tim Beiko](https://hackmd.io/@timbeiko/eth-governance)

Commit message:

add missing files, update sidebar, add stub warnings

docs/wiki/dev/pm.md, after:

# Core development coordination 

> :warning: This article is a [stub](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Stub), help the wiki by [contributing](/contributing.md) and expanding it.

Because of the approach of client diversity and decentralization, Ethereum core development is spread across many teams from various organizations. Roughly estimated, there is around 200+ client developers, researchers, testers and other contributors split across ~20 teams. 

To effectively maintain and implement various initiatives affecting the Ethereum protocol, all of these people need be able to reach consensus and collaborate in a productive manner. Generally, this is possible thanks to free and open source nature of Ethereum and it's design and development based unix philosophy but still requires lot of coordination work. 

## Ethereum PM repository

The [ethereum/pm](https://github.com/ethereum/pm) repository is used for Ethereum project management purposes. It serves as a coordination for planning developer calls and archiving their recordings. 

*main use:*
 - Execution and Consensus Layer AllCoreDevs meetings

*secondary uses:*
 - Breakout Rooms on various protocol-related topics (e.g. EOF, account abstraction, etc)
 - There's a Google Calendar tracking upcoming protocol meetings.

### Resources

[Ethereum Governance by Tim Beiko](https://hackmd.io/@timbeiko/eth-governance)
