docs/eps/intro.md, before:

# EPF Protocol Studies

Ethereum Protocol Fellowship Study Group (EPFsg) is a learning community formed to gather knowledge and educate itself about the Ethereum protocol. 

The protocol evolves and grows quickly, it's an always-changing infinite garden. To sustain its credible neutrality, this pace should be reflected in the community as well. Various communities using, building or living on Ethereum need to be able to learn and become involved in the core protocol. The complexity of the architecture, codebases and dynamic development with scattered resources can discourage many talented people from participating on the core level. The protocol study group aims to bridge the gap by introducing a curriculum focused on all parts of the Ethereum stack & roadmap and gathering people interested in diving into it. 

## Program Structure

The program is an open, 10-week study program divided into 2 phases. 

The first half is dedicated to general understanding of the internal mechanisms of the protocol, its architecture and basic concepts. The second half offers 2 different tracks - development and research. Presentations in each track offer a deeper dive into specific topics within the R&D domains.  

Each online session will be led by core developers and researchers, come with pre-meeting reading material to get you familiar with the topic and terminology as well as a post-meeting activity to strengthen and solidify your understanding.

Checkout the study group content in this folder, start with [Week 0](week0.md).

## Participate

The first instance of EPF study group is starting in February 2024. It's completely open and permissionlesss and it is up to each participant as to how they want to approach it. Whether you want to learn as much as possible, focus only on certain topics or share your knowledge with others, you are welcomed.

Study group participants will collaboratively develop a comprehensive wiki, serving as an evolving knowledge base for current and future core developers. This will provide students with practical experience in contributing to open source resources, while gaining invaluable experience in documentation and community-driven development.

While this program is designed to act as a precursor to the Ethereum Protocol Fellowship, the study group is for anyone that is interested in learning more about the inner workings of the Ethereum Protocol. Those that have some general knowledge or use of Ethereum and/or blockchains as well as those that have some computer science, technical, or developer experience will get the most from this program.

Commit message:

Updates, added schedule, town hall call, docsify fixes

docs/eps/intro.md, after:

# EPF Protocol Studies

Ethereum Protocol Fellowship Study Group (EPFsg) is a learning community formed to gather knowledge and educate itself about the Ethereum protocol. 

The protocol evolves and grows quickly, it's an always-changing infinite garden. To sustain its credible neutrality, this pace should be reflected in the community as well. Various communities using, building or living on Ethereum need to be able to learn and become involved in the core protocol. The complexity of the architecture, codebases and dynamic development with scattered resources can discourage many talented people from participating on the core level. The protocol study group aims to bridge the gap by introducing a curriculum focused on all parts of the Ethereum stack & roadmap and gathering people interested in diving into it. 

> Check also the announcement blog post https://blog.ethereum.org/2024/02/07/epf-study-group

## Program Structure

The program is an open, 10-week study program divided into 2 phases. 

The first half is dedicated to general understanding of the internal mechanisms of the protocol, its architecture and basic concepts. The second half offers 2 different tracks - development and research. Presentations in each track offer a deeper dive into specific topics within the R&D domains.  

Each online session will be led by core developers and researchers, come with pre-meeting reading material to get you familiar with the topic and terminology as well as a post-meeting activity to strengthen and solidify your understanding.

Weekly topics, their presentations and materials can be all found in this folder. Checkout the study group content in this folder, start with [Week 0](week0.md).

### Schedule

The first part of the program consists of 5 weeks with introductions to high level domains of the protocol. 

| Date        | Topic                              | Speaker                 |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------- | ----------------------- |
| February 19 | Intro to EPS and Ethereum protocol | Josh Davis, Mario Havel |
| February 26 | Execution Layer                    | Lightclient             |
| March 4     | Consensus layer                    | Alex Stokes             |
| March 11    | Testing and security               | Mario Vega              |
| March 18    | Roadmap and research               | Domotheus               |

The second part of the program offers two distinct tracks focused on development and research with deeper dive into each topic. Detailed schedule coming soon.

## Participate

The first instance of EPF study group is starting in February 2024. It's completely open and permissionlesss and it is up to each participant as to how they want to approach it. Whether you want to learn as much as possible, focus only on certain topics or share your knowledge with others, you are welcomed. Altough it's opened, [you can register](https://forms.gle/7TqmryC217EPwgqr9) to help us tailor the experience better.

Study group participants will collaboratively develop a comprehensive wiki, serving as an evolving knowledge base for current and future core developers. This will provide students with practical experience in contributing to open source resources, while gaining invaluable experience in documentation and community-driven development.

While this program is designed to act as a precursor to the Ethereum Protocol Fellowship, the study group is for anyone that is interested in learning more about the inner workings of the Ethereum Protocol. Those that have some general knowledge or use of Ethereum and/or blockchains as well as those that have some computer science, technical, or developer experience will get the most from this program.
