docs/eps/week6-dev.md, before:

# Study Group Week 6 | Consensus and Execution spec

The development track of week 6 will provide a deeper insight into consensus and execution layer specification. 

Join the presentation by [Hsiao-Wei](https://twitter.com/icebearhww) and [Sam](https://twitter.com/_SamWilsn_) on [Monday, March 25, 2PM UTC](https://savvytime.com/converter/utc-to-germany-berlin-united-kingdom-london-ny-new-york-city-ca-san-francisco-china-shanghai-japan-tokyo-australia-sydney/mar-18-2024/4pm). (Note it's 2 hour earlier than our regular calls!)

The talk will be streamed live on [StreamEth](https://streameth.org/65cf97e702e803dbd57d823f/epf_study_group) and Youtube, links will be provided before the call in the [Discord server](https://discord.gg/addwpQbhpq). Discord also serves for the discussion and questions during the stream. 

## Pre-reading

Before starting with the week 6 content, make yourself familiar with resources in previous weeks, especially 1-3. 

Additionally, you can read get ready by studying following resources:

- https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs
- https://blog.ethereum.org/2023/08/29/eel-spec
- https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs

## Outline

- HWW on Consensus specs
- Sam on EELS

## Additional reading and exercises 

- https://ethereum.org/en/developers/tutorials/yellow-paper-evm/
- https://eth2book.info/capella/annotated-spec/

Commit message:

Mar 25 wiki update (#117)
* Protocol: DS: Verkle Tree intro added (#110)

* Protocol: DS: Verkle Tree intro added

* Protocol: DS: typo

* Update info on verkles

---------

Co-authored-by: Mário Havel <61149543+taxmeifyoucan@users.noreply.github.com>

* add week 6 to sidebar

* Update week6-dev.md (#116)

* add week 6 research

* :scroll:  Adds History section (#52)

* :heavy_plus_sign: Adding The Merge to History section

* :construction_worker: Added post-merge block proposal steps

* Lean changes

---------

Co-authored-by: Mário Havel <61149543+taxmeifyoucan@users.noreply.github.com>

* ✨ feat(EL): precompiled contracts (#106)

* ✨ feat(EL): precompiled contracts

* 🥢 nit(EL): clarity

* 🥢 nit(EL): precompile vs opcode, proposed precompiles

* add a resource

---------

Co-authored-by: rahul <raxhvl@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Mário Havel <61149543+taxmeifyoucan@users.noreply.github.com>

---------

Co-authored-by: Abhimanyu <ABresting@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Hsiao-Wei Wang <hsiaowei.eth@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: GianfrancoBazzani <55500596+GianfrancoBazzani@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: rahul <10168946+raxhvl@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: rahul <raxhvl@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/eps/week6-dev.md, after:

# Study Group Week 6 | Consensus and Execution spec

The development track of week 6 will provide a deeper insight into consensus and execution layer specification. 

Join the presentation by [Hsiao-Wei](https://twitter.com/icebearhww) and [Sam](https://twitter.com/_SamWilsn_) on [Monday, March 25, 2PM UTC](https://savvytime.com/converter/utc-to-germany-berlin-united-kingdom-london-ny-new-york-city-ca-san-francisco-china-shanghai-japan-tokyo-australia-sydney/mar-18-2024/4pm). (Note it's 2 hour earlier than our regular calls!)

The talk will be streamed live on [StreamEth](https://streameth.org/65cf97e702e803dbd57d823f/epf_study_group) and Youtube, links will be provided before the call in the [Discord server](https://discord.gg/addwpQbhpq). Discord also serves for the discussion and questions during the stream. 

## Pre-reading

Before starting with the week 6 content, make yourself familiar with resources in previous weeks, especially 1-3. 

Additionally, you can read and get ready by studying the following resources:

- Consensus specs:
    - Index: https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs
    - Pyspec tutorial: https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/tests/README.md
- Execution specs:
    - https://blog.ethereum.org/2023/08/29/eel-spec
    - https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs

## Outline

- Hsiao-Wei Wang on Consensus specs
- Sam Wilson on EELS

## Additional reading and exercises 

- https://ethereum.org/en/developers/tutorials/yellow-paper-evm/
- Vitalik Buterin’s Annotated spec: https://github.com/ethereum/annotated-spec
- Ben Edgington’s Upgrading Ethereum Book: https://eth2book.info
