docs/eps/week10-dev.md, before:

# Study Group Week 10 | Precompiles 

Week 10 dev talk is diving into EVM precompiles and their integration in execution clients.

Join the presentation by [Danno Ferrin](https://twitter.com/shemnon), on [Monday, April 22, 4PM UTC](https://savvytime.com/converter/utc-to-germany-berlin-united-kingdom-london-china-shanghai-ny-new-york-city-japan-tokyo-australia-sydney-india-delhi-argentina-buenos-aires/apr-22-2024/4pm).

The talk will be streamed live on [StreamEth](https://streameth.org/65cf97e702e803dbd57d823f/epf_study_group) and [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/@ethprotocolfellows/streams), links will be provided before the call in the [Discord server](https://discord.gg/addwpQbhpq). Discord also serves for the discussion and questions during the stream. 

## Pre-reading

Before starting with the week 10 development content, make yourself familiar with resources in previous weeks, especially week 2 and week 8. You should have understanding of the execution client architecture and EVM. 

The talk will use examples from Besu, a Java implementation of execution client. At least basic understanding of Java syntax is recommended.

Additionally, you can get ready by studying the following resources:
- [Exploring Precompiled Contracts on Ethereum: A Deep Dive](https://lucasmartincalderon.medium.com/exploring-precompiled-contracts-on-ethereum-a-deep-dive-4e9f9682e0aa)
- https://www.evm.codes/precompiled

## Outline

- EVM Precompiles
- How they are integrated
- Which precompiles exist 
- How L2s and L1s use them
- Challanges of creating precompiles

## Additional reading and exercises

- [EVM Precompiled and System Contract Catalog](https://github.com/shemnon/precompiles/)
- [RollCall breakout on precompiles](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tg01COfxi_M)
- [Custom RPCs and Precompiles for Hyperledger Besu](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=djL5nczlYFw)

Commit message:

✨ feat(Week 10D): Links (#204)
* ✨ feat(Week 10D): Links

* update spellcheck for kzg and preconfs pages

* Update wordlist.txt

Added Parallelization to the list.

* 🥢 nit: typo

---------

Co-authored-by: Mário Havel <61149543+taxmeifyoucan@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: rahul <raxhvl@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Nagu Thogiti <thogiti@gmail.com>

docs/eps/week10-dev.md, after:

# Study Group Week 10 | Precompiles 

Week 10 dev talk is diving into EVM precompiles and their integration in execution clients.

Join the presentation by [Danno Ferrin](https://twitter.com/shemnon), on [Monday, April 22, 4PM UTC](https://savvytime.com/converter/utc-to-germany-berlin-united-kingdom-london-china-shanghai-ny-new-york-city-japan-tokyo-australia-sydney-india-delhi-argentina-buenos-aires/apr-22-2024/4pm).

## Links
- Watch the talk on [StreamEth](https://streameth.org/65cf97e702e803dbd57d823f/epf_study_group) and [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=daiMhkt0XTw)
- [Presentation from the talk.](https://hackmd.io/@shemnon/precompiles)
- [Discussion thread on Discord: Week 10D: Precompiles](https://discord.com/channels/1205546645496795137/1231990093506678785).

## Pre-reading

Before starting with the week 10 development content, make yourself familiar with resources in previous weeks, especially week 2 and week 8. You should have understanding of the execution client architecture and EVM. 

The talk will use examples from Besu, a Java implementation of execution client. At least basic understanding of Java syntax is recommended.

Additionally, you can get ready by studying the following resources:
- [Exploring Precompiled Contracts on Ethereum: A Deep Dive](https://lucasmartincalderon.medium.com/exploring-precompiled-contracts-on-ethereum-a-deep-dive-4e9f9682e0aa)
- [Precompiles documentation by evm.codes](https://www.evm.codes/precompiled)

## Outline

- EVM Precompiles
- How they are integrated
- Which precompiles exist 
- How L2s and L1s use them
- Challanges of creating precompiles

## Additional reading and exercises

- [EVM Precompiled and System Contract Catalog](https://github.com/shemnon/precompiles/)
- [RollCall breakout on precompiles](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tg01COfxi_M)
- [Custom RPCs and Precompiles for Hyperledger Besu](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=djL5nczlYFw)
