docs/eps/week4.md, before:

# Study Group Week 4 | Testing and Security

Week 4 is diving into the testing tools and practices necessary to keep the network secure. 

Join the presentation by [Mario Vega](https://github.com/marioevz) on [Monday, March 11, 4PM UTC](https://savvytime.com/converter/utc-to-germany-berlin-united-kingdom-london-ny-new-york-city-ca-san-francisco-china-shanghai-japan-tokyo-australia-sydney/mar-11-2024/4pm).


Watch the presentation on Ethereum core testing infrastracture on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQVW5dJ8J0c). Presentations slides are [available here](https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies/tree/main/docs/eps/presentations/week4.pdf). 

[recording](https://www.youtube.com/embed/PQVW5dJ8J0c?si=fv5ww4_6zInGXpjO ':include :type=iframe width=100% height=560 frameborder="0" allow="fullscreen" allowfullscreen encrypted-media gyroscope picture-in-picture web-share')

For archive of the discussion during the talk, check [this thread](https://discord.com/channels/1205546645496795137/1216771776810455160/1216771782040621118) in our Discord server.

## Pre-reading

Before starting with the week 4 content, make yourself familiar with resources in [week 3](/eps/week3.md). 

Additionally, you can read get ready by reading following resources:

- https://ethereum-tests.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
- https://ethereum.github.io/execution-spec-tests

## Outline

- https://github.com/ethereum/execution-spec-tests
- https://github.com/ethereum/hive
- https://github.com/ethereum/tests
- https://github.com/ethereum/retesteth
- https://github.com/lightclient/rpctestgen
- https://github.com/marioevz/eth_tools
- https://github.com/kurtosis-tech/kurtosis
- https://github.com/MariusVanDerWijden/FuzzyVM
- https://github.com/MariusVanDerWijden/tx-fuzz

## Additional reading and exercises 

- [Quest for the Best Tests, a Retrospective on #TestingTheMerge by Pari](https://archive.devcon.org/archive/watch/6/quest-for-the-best-tests-a-retrospective-on-testingthemerge/?tab=YouTube)
- [Killing ETH - Finding Consensus Issues on Layer 1 by Marius](https://archive.devcon.org/archive/watch/6/killing-eth-finding-consensus-issues-on-layer-1/?tab=YouTube)
- [Dencun testing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=88tZticGbTo)

Commit message:

Add written notes for week 3 and week 4

docs/eps/week4.md, after:

# Study Group Week 4 | Testing and Security

Week 4 is diving into the testing tools and practices necessary to keep the network secure. 

Join the presentation by [Mario Vega](https://github.com/marioevz) on [Monday, March 11, 4PM UTC](https://savvytime.com/converter/utc-to-germany-berlin-united-kingdom-london-ny-new-york-city-ca-san-francisco-china-shanghai-japan-tokyo-australia-sydney/mar-11-2024/4pm).


Watch the presentation on Ethereum core testing infrastracture on [Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQVW5dJ8J0c). Presentations slides are [available here](https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies/tree/main/docs/eps/presentations/week4.pdf). 

[recording](https://www.youtube.com/embed/PQVW5dJ8J0c?si=fv5ww4_6zInGXpjO ':include :type=iframe width=100% height=560 frameborder="0" allow="fullscreen" allowfullscreen encrypted-media gyroscope picture-in-picture web-share')

For written summary of week 2 presentation, check the [notes](https://ab9jvcjkej.feishu.cn/docx/R1IOdEkDxoiNNHxvA6sclfITnLB)

For archive of the discussion during the talk, check [this thread](https://discord.com/channels/1205546645496795137/1216771776810455160/1216771782040621118) in our Discord server.

## Pre-reading

Before starting with the week 4 content, make yourself familiar with resources in [week 3](/eps/week3.md). 

Additionally, you can read get ready by reading following resources:

- https://ethereum-tests.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
- https://ethereum.github.io/execution-spec-tests

## Outline

- https://github.com/ethereum/execution-spec-tests
- https://github.com/ethereum/hive
- https://github.com/ethereum/tests
- https://github.com/ethereum/retesteth
- https://github.com/lightclient/rpctestgen
- https://github.com/marioevz/eth_tools
- https://github.com/kurtosis-tech/kurtosis
- https://github.com/MariusVanDerWijden/FuzzyVM
- https://github.com/MariusVanDerWijden/tx-fuzz

## Additional reading and exercises 

- [Quest for the Best Tests, a Retrospective on #TestingTheMerge by Pari](https://archive.devcon.org/archive/watch/6/quest-for-the-best-tests-a-retrospective-on-testingthemerge/?tab=YouTube)
- [Killing ETH - Finding Consensus Issues on Layer 1 by Marius](https://archive.devcon.org/archive/watch/6/killing-eth-finding-consensus-issues-on-layer-1/?tab=YouTube)
- [Dencun testing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=88tZticGbTo)
