docs/eps/week6-research.md, before:

# Study Group Week 6 | Sharding and DAS

Week 6 research track is going to be a dive into data availability sampling and danksharding. 

Join the presentation by [Dankrad](https://twitter.com/dankrad) on [Wednesday, March 27, 4PM UTC](https://savvytime.com/converter/utc-to-germany-berlin-united-kingdom-london-ny-new-york-city-ca-san-francisco-china-shanghai-japan-tokyo-australia-sydney/mar-27-2024/4pm).


The talk will be streamed live on [StreamEth](https://streameth.org/65cf97e702e803dbd57d823f/epf_study_group) and Youtube, links will be provided before the call in the [Discord server](https://discord.gg/addwpQbhpq). Discord also serves for the discussion and questions during the stream. 

## Pre-reading

Before starting with the week 6 content, make yourself familiar with resources in introductory weeks. 

Additionally, you can read and get ready by studying the following resources:

- [Data availability problem](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OJT_fR7wexw)
- [Danksharding by Dankrad, 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Cg2iu4C4sU)
- [Sharding and DAS proposal](https://hackmd.io/@vbuterin/sharding_proposal)

## Outline

- Polynomial commitment schemes
- Data availability
- Sharding

## Additional reading and exercises 

- [Foundations of Data Availability Sampling](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KUNE3kR1kwU)
- [Desing choices in DAS](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Al7Jns8bCO4)
- [Danksharding workshop, Devcon Bogota](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8L2C6RDMV9Q)
- [Fraud and DA proofs paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.09044)
- [WIP DAS proposal](https://hackmd.io/@vbuterin/das)

Commit message:

Mar 28 wiki update (#123)
* Protocol: DS: Verkle Tree intro added (#110)

* Protocol: DS: Verkle Tree intro added

* Protocol: DS: typo

* Update info on verkles

---------

Co-authored-by: Mário Havel <61149543+taxmeifyoucan@users.noreply.github.com>

* add week 6 to sidebar

* Update week6-dev.md (#116)

* add week 6 research

* :scroll:  Adds History section (#52)

* :heavy_plus_sign: Adding The Merge to History section

* :construction_worker: Added post-merge block proposal steps

* Lean changes

---------

Co-authored-by: Mário Havel <61149543+taxmeifyoucan@users.noreply.github.com>

* ✨ feat(EL): precompiled contracts (#106)

* ✨ feat(EL): precompiled contracts

* 🥢 nit(EL): clarity

* 🥢 nit(EL): precompile vs opcode, proposed precompiles

* add a resource

---------

Co-authored-by: rahul <raxhvl@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Mário Havel <61149543+taxmeifyoucan@users.noreply.github.com>

* Update week6-research.md

* eps updates

* 🥢 nit: spelling (#120)

Co-authored-by: rahul <raxhvl@users.noreply.github.com>

* add week 6 resources

* add week 7-dev

---------

Co-authored-by: Abhimanyu <ABresting@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Hsiao-Wei Wang <hsiaowei.eth@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: GianfrancoBazzani <55500596+GianfrancoBazzani@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: rahul <10168946+raxhvl@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: rahul <raxhvl@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Josh <joshdavislight@gmail.com>

docs/eps/week6-research.md, after:

# Study Group Week 6 | Sharding and DAS

Week 6 research track is going to be a dive into data availability sampling and danksharding. 

Watch the presentations by [Dakrad](https://twitter.com/dankrad) on StreamEth or Youtube. Slides are [available here](https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies/blob/main/docs/eps/presentations/week6_research.pdf). 

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ro2AGRkLC2s?si=IaNwL7OXl5tQvqOM" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Pre-reading

Before starting with the week 6 content, make yourself familiar with resources in introductory weeks. 

Additionally, you can read and get ready by studying the following resources:

- [Data availability problem](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OJT_fR7wexw)
- [Sharding and DAS proposal](https://hackmd.io/@vbuterin/sharding_proposal)

## Outline

- Ethereum scalability
- History of sharding and path forward
- Data availability

## Additional reading and exercises 

- [Foundations of Data Availability Sampling](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KUNE3kR1kwU)
- [Desing choices in DAS](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Al7Jns8bCO4)
- [Danksharding workshop, Devcon Bogota](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8L2C6RDMV9Q)
- [Fraud and DA proofs paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.09044)
- [WIP DAS proposal](https://hackmd.io/@vbuterin/das)
