docs/_sidebar.md, before:

- [Home](readme.md)
- **Study Group**
- [EPFsg overview](/eps/intro.md)
- Schedule
  - [Week 0](/eps/week0.md)
  - [Week 1](/eps/week1.md)
  - [Week 2](/eps/week2.md)
  - [Week 3](/eps/week3.md)
  - [Week 4](/eps/week4.md)
- [Contributing](contributing.md)
- **Protocol Wiki**
- The Protocol
  - [Overview](/wiki/protocol/overview.md)
  - [History](/wiki/protocol/history.md)
  - [Coordination](/wiki/protocol/pm.md)
  - [Data Structures](/wiki/protocol/data-structures.md)
  - [CS Resources]
- Execution Layer
  - [EL Clients](/wiki/EL/el-clients.md)
  - [EL Specs](/wiki/EL/el-specs.md)
  - Client architecture
  - [EVM](/wiki/EL/evm.md)
  - [Transaction]
  - [DevP2P]
  - [MPT]
  - [JSON-RPC](/wiki/EL/JSON-RPC.md)
- [Consensus Layer](/wiki/CL/overview.md)
  - [CL Clients](/wiki/CL/cl-clients.md)
  - [CL Specs](/wiki/CL/cl-specs.md)
  - [Proof-of-Stake]
  - [Beacon API]
  - [Networking](/wiki/CL/cl-networking.md)
  - Client architecture
- Development
  - [Core development](/wiki/dev/core-development.md)
  - [Network upgrades](/wiki/dev/upgrades.md)
- Testing and security
  - [Testing overview](/wiki/testing/overview.md)
  - [Incidents](/wiki/testing/incidents.md)
  - [hive](/wiki/testing/hive.md)
  - Formal Verification
- Research
  - [Roadmap overview](/wiki/research/roadmap.md)
  - [Scaling](/wiki/research/scaling/scaling.md)
    - [Core Changes](/wiki/research/scaling/core-changes/core-changes.md)
      - [EIP-4844](/wiki/research/scaling/core-changes/eip-4844.md)
    - Blobs
    - Sharding
    - Statelessness
    - Purge
  - MEV
    - PBS
    - Censorship
  - Proof of Stake
    - Upgrades
    - SSF
    - SSLE
  - [Light Clients](/wiki/research/light-clients.md)
  - Privacy
  - AA
  - ASE
  - EOF
  - Portal Network
- [Cryptography](/wiki/Cryptography/intro.md)
  - [ECDSA](/wiki/Cryptography/ecdsa.md)
  - BLS
  - [Commitments]
    - Polynomials
    - Commitment schemes
  - ZK
- [Protocol Fellowship](/wiki/epf.md)

- **Wiki Info**
  - [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies)

<form action="https://epf.wiki/#/eps/intro" target="_blank">
  <input type="submit" value="Join the protocol" style="cursor: pointer;margin-top:12px;padding:8px;background-color:#FFFFFF;border:1px solid #0374B5;border-radius:.25rem;color:#0374B5;display:inline-block;text-align:center;text-decoration:none;width:250px;-webkit-text-size-adjust:none;mso-hide:all;" />
</form>

Commit message:

added PoS-design folder and files to /research and _sidebar

docs/_sidebar.md, after:

- [Home](readme.md)
- **Study Group**
- [EPFsg overview](/eps/intro.md)
- Schedule
  - [Week 0](/eps/week0.md)
  - [Week 1](/eps/week1.md)
  - [Week 2](/eps/week2.md)
  - [Week 3](/eps/week3.md)
  - [Week 4](/eps/week4.md)
- [Contributing](contributing.md)
- **Protocol Wiki**
- The Protocol
  - [Overview](/wiki/protocol/overview.md)
  - [History](/wiki/protocol/history.md)
  - [Coordination](/wiki/protocol/pm.md)
  - [Data Structures](/wiki/protocol/data-structures.md)
  - [CS Resources]
- Execution Layer
  - [EL Clients](/wiki/EL/el-clients.md)
  - [EL Specs](/wiki/EL/el-specs.md)
  - Client architecture
  - [EVM](/wiki/EL/evm.md)
  - [Transaction]
  - [DevP2P]
  - [MPT]
  - [JSON-RPC](/wiki/EL/JSON-RPC.md)
- [Consensus Layer](/wiki/CL/overview.md)
  - [CL Clients](/wiki/CL/cl-clients.md)
  - [CL Specs](/wiki/CL/cl-specs.md)
  - [Proof-of-Stake]
  - [Beacon API]
  - [Networking](/wiki/CL/cl-networking.md)
  - Client architecture
- Development
  - [Core development](/wiki/dev/core-development.md)
  - [Network upgrades](/wiki/dev/upgrades.md)
- Testing and security
  - [Testing overview](/wiki/testing/overview.md)
  - [Incidents](/wiki/testing/incidents.md)
  - [hive](/wiki/testing/hive.md)
  - Formal Verification
- Research
  - [Roadmap overview](/wiki/research/roadmap.md)
  - [Scaling](/wiki/research/scaling/scaling.md)
    - [Core Changes](/wiki/research/scaling/core-changes/core-changes.md)
      - [EIP-4844](/wiki/research/scaling/core-changes/eip-4844.md)
    - Blobs
    - Sharding
    - Statelessness
    - Purge
  - MEV
    - PBS
    - Censorship
  - Proof of Stake Design
    - Upgrades
    - SSF
    - SSLE
    - [Inclusion lists](/docs/wiki/research/PoS-design/inclusion-lists.md)
    - [Raise MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALLANCE](/docs/wiki/research/PoS-design/raise_max-effective-balance.md)
    - [Preconfirmations](/docs/wiki/research/PoS-design/preconfirmations.md)
    - [Solutions to liquid staking centralization](/docs/wiki/research/PoS-design/staking-pools-solutions.md)
  - [Light Clients](/wiki/research/light-clients.md)
  - Privacy
  - AA
  - ASE
  - EOF
  - Portal Network
- [Cryptography](/wiki/Cryptography/intro.md)
  - [ECDSA](/wiki/Cryptography/ecdsa.md)
  - BLS
  - [Commitments]
    - Polynomials
    - Commitment schemes
  - ZK
- [Protocol Fellowship](/wiki/epf.md)

- **Wiki Info**
  - [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies)

<form action="https://epf.wiki/#/eps/intro" target="_blank">
  <input type="submit" value="Join the protocol" style="cursor: pointer;margin-top:12px;padding:8px;background-color:#FFFFFF;border:1px solid #0374B5;border-radius:.25rem;color:#0374B5;display:inline-block;text-align:center;text-decoration:none;width:250px;-webkit-text-size-adjust:none;mso-hide:all;" />
</form>
