# Contribute to the Protocol Wiki

The Protocol Wiki is an open and collaborative project. Whether you are part of the [Study Group](study-group.md) or not, we welcome your contributions! Help us to build the documentation and improve availability of learning resources on Ethereum core R&D.

*We are not aiming to rewrite other existing Ethereum documentation* but rather create a cohesive collection of technical resources for aspiring core developers and researchers.

When creating contributions, consider whether it doesn't exist in another form elsewhere. Use it and reference it in your text but do not copy its content. Focus on adding it into a big picture, connecting it with related topics. 

Write contributions based on what you learned about the protocol along the way, what experience you gathered and missing pieces that slowed you down. Consider it as explaining to your peers, reflect on your own journey as a core developer/reseacher.

## Contributing

Before you start with editing, please read the code of conduct, following guide and make yourself familiar with the overall wiki structure. 

The wiki source is hosted in github repository at [github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies](https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies). Mirrored at //TODO

> The wiki is served from `wiki-pages` branch. When contributing, open a PR to `main` branch (repo default branch). After a while, all updates are collectively upstreamed to `wiki-pages` to update the website.

You can explore existing issues or open a new one for missing content, suggest improving existing content or wiki frontend features. If you identify missing or unfinished content, feel free to open a PR. 

We are not aiming to recreate other existing wikis. If the same content is well explained elsewhere, just link it and provide additional context. 

### What does(n't) belong here

The scope of this wiki is limited to technical resources of the Ethereum core protocol infrastracture. This means its specifications, implementations, testing, research or related tooling. 

It **does not** cover onchain protocols/dapps, layer 2s/rollups or any other tools which are not dependencies of core infrastracture. In other words, stuff which would be covered by EIPs, not ERCs.

### Structure and collaboration

The wiki is supposed to cover all important parts of Ethereum core protocol and its development. The protocol architecture and related topics is reflected in the wiki format. The whole wiki lives under `/docs/wiki` and the [sidebar](_sidebar.md) defines the main documentation structure. High level areas are abstracted to directories which include all subtopics. 

For contributors, we recommend focusing on specific topics contained in corresponding documents. It's best to own a single topic and work out all the details. Create a new document and add the topic to the sidebar if it's not there yet. Join the [discord server](https://discord.gg/HnCjCvCN), let others know what you are working on in the group channel and collaborate with other contributors writing about related topics. If you are working with multiple people on a significant piece of content, you can have a dedicated branch in the repo for easier coordination. 

## Editing wiki

The wiki is a collection of regular markdown files which can be edited directly using github interface or your favorite markdown editor. When making commits and opening PRs, please provide a commentary explaining your contribution.

The web docs version is generated by [Docsify](https://docsify.js.org/). Learn about its [config](https://docsify.js.org/#/configuration) and [features](https://docsify.js.org/#/plugins) options. The configuration and web design is also open to improvements or suggestions. 

For more extensive edits or changes to configuration, use Docsify to preview the web locally. You just need git and node.js. 

Install docsify, clone the repository and host it locally. 

```
npm i docsify-cli -g
git clone https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies.git
cd protocol-studies
docsify serve ./docs
```

## Style guide

Wiki pages follow standard Markdown which can be rendered by Github or Docsify. For details on using it, look into the Markdown [guide](https://www.markdownguide.org/). 

The audience of this wiki is technical and the content should reflect that. There are many guides on technical and documentation writing you can learn from. Here are few guidelines to follow when writing this wiki:

- Write in an objective, clear and explanatory tone
- Avoid unnecessary simplifications, describe the technical reality
- Avoid using too long and complex sentences or paragraphs
    - Use concise and clear statements 
    - Break down your text using blockquotes, bullet points or images 
- Always link your resources and verify them
- Use bullet points or tables for topics which require enumerating 
- Highlight keywords to support scanning and skimming through the article
- Provide visualizations to explain the topic better
- When using acronyms or a technical jargon, make sure to introduce it first 
- Don't use LLMs to generate the text
    - We don't accept texts fully generated by AI, however we recommend using it to fix grammar or phrasing
- Consider creating a hands on guides or tutorials
- Add recommended reading at the top, point to topics which are dependencies of yours

Goal is to produce a credible neutral text which is formal, well-structured, and maintains a clear progression of ideas. The content should be purely technical and shouldn't waste space on introducing high level/well known concepts. Introductory topics are necessary and can use comparisons, historical anecdotes, and concrete examples to make complex concepts more accessible.

### Content standardization

The wiki uses American English over British spelling. Terminology, capitalization and nomenclature should match across all pages. Use [Ethereum.org guide](https://ethereum.org/contributing/style-guide/content-standardization) for the reference. 

Usage of images and visualizations is encouraged. If you are using an image created by a third party, make sure its licence allows it and provide link to the original. For creating your own visualizations, we suggest [excalidraw.com](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw). 

Feel free to use [emojis](https://docsify.js.org/#/emoji?id=emoji) or [icons](https://icongr.am/fontawesome) where it fits, for example in blockquotes. 

### Linking resources

When adding an external link, you can use it directly in the text or on the bottom of the page in "Resources" section.

When linking resources use descriptive names, such as [inevitableeth.com](https://inevitableeth.com/) instead of generic phrases like [this wiki](https://inevitableeth.com/).

Don't overwhelm reader with too many resources within the text.

When linking a page within this wiki, use a relative path and if it references specific topic within the page, use a link to heading IDs. 

For other important links, add a section on the bottom of the page with list of resources. Resources should have a name or short description with a link and alternative link to its archived mirror. We strongly suggest adding a link to the latest snapshot from archive.org. Example of a link in a resource section: 

[JSON-RPC API reference](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/apis/json-rpc), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240117035335/https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/apis/json-rpc)


## Anything else?

This page is also opened for contributors! Suggest improvements to our style and guidelines in the github repo. 
