# EIP-4844

[EIP-4844](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4844) introduces Blobs, a new space to store data inside a transaction that will be much cheaper than `calldata` because they will have a new type of gas that is independent of normal gas and follows its own targeting rule.

Before EIP-4844, the Transaction data structure was the following ([ethereum exeuction-specs repository](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/blob/0f9e4345b60d36c23fffaa69f70cf9cdb975f4ba/src/ethereum/london/fork_types.py#L49)):

```python
@slotted_freezable
@dataclass
class LegacyTransaction:
  nonce: U256
  gas_price: Uint
  gas: Uint
  to: Union[Bytes0, Address]
  value: U256
  data: Bytes
  v: U256
  r: U256
  s: U256

@slotted_freezable
@dataclass
class AccessListTransaction:
  chain_id: U64
  nonce: U256
  gas_price: Uint
  gas: Uint
  to: Union[Bytes0, Address]
  value: U256
  data: Bytes
  access_list: Tuple[Tuple[Address, Tuple[Bytes32, ...]], ...]
  y_parity: U256
  r: U256
  s: U256

@slotted_freezable
@dataclass
class FeeMarketTransaction:
  chain_id: U64
  nonce: U256
  max_priority_fee_per_gas: Uint
  max_fee_per_gas: Uint
  gas: Uint
  to: Union[Bytes0, Address]
  value: U256
  data: Bytes
  access_list: Tuple[Tuple[Address, Tuple[Bytes32, ...]], ...]
  y_parity: U256
  r: U256
  s: U256

Transaction = Union[
  LegacyTransaction, AccessListTransaction, FeeMarketTransaction
]
```

The `calldata` is encoded inside the `data` field of the Transaction class. The `calldata` is accessible by the EVM, and the format to encode and decode it is specified in the [Contract ABI](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/abi-spec.html).

With the EIP-4844, the new Transaction data structure will be the following:

```python
@slotted_freezable
@dataclass
class BlobTransaction: # the class name may change
  chain_id: U64
  nonce: U256
  max_priority_fee_per_gas: Uint
  max_fee_per_gas: Uint
  gas: Uint
  to: Union[Bytes0, Address]
  value: U256
  data: Bytes
  access_list: Tuple[Tuple[Address, Tuple[Bytes32, ...]], ...]
  max_fee_per_blob_gas: U256
  blob_versioned_hashes: VersionedHash
  y_parity: U256
  r: U256
  s: U256
```

EIP-4844 will introduce two more fields in the Transaction class, which are `max_fee_per_blob_gas` and `blob_versioned_hashes`.
EIP-4844 introduced a new transaction type where `TransactionType == BLOB_TX_TYPE` and the `TransactionPayload` is the rlp encoding of the above class.

## Changes on the Execution Specs

The upgrade which will introduce EIP-4844 into the Execution Layer has been labeled **Cancun**.

### 1. Add checks inside the State Transition Function

The EL now must check that the blob specific fields are valid for each transaction that is going to be executed in the State Transition Function (STF).

The checks include (For the specs code, see [here](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4844#execution-layer-validation)):

- check that the signer has enough balance to cover the cost of both transaction gas fee and blob gas fees

```python
# modify the check for sufficient balance
max_total_fee = tx.gas * tx.max_fee_per_gas
if get_tx_type(tx) == BLOB_TX_TYPE:
    max_total_fee += get_total_blob_gas(tx) * tx.max_fee_per_blob_gas
assert signer(tx).balance >= max_total_fee
```

- check that the blob transaction contains at least 1 valid `blob_versioned_hash` (see CL changes) and that they are formatted correctly

```python
assert len(tx.blob_versioned_hashes) > 0
```

- check that the user is willing to pay at least the current blob base fee

```python
assert tx.max_fee_per_blob_gas >= get_blob_base_fee(block.header)
```

Finally, the EL STF must keep track of the gas being gas used for blob transactions (same as it already happens for EIP1559 transactions).

```python
blob_gas_used += get_total_blob_gas(tx)
```

## Changes on the Consensus Specs

The upgrade which will introduce EIP-4844 into the Consensus Layer has been labeled **Deneb**.

### 1. Consensus Layer Validation

As stated in the [EIP-4844](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4844#consensus-layer-validation) blobs are referenced but not fully encoded inside the beacon block body. Instead of embedding the full contents in the body, the blobs are propagated separately, as "sidecars".

This "sidecars" design provides forward compatibility for further data increases by black-boxing `is_data_available()`, which means that in future upgrades `is_data_available()` implementation may change, for example to include data-availability-sampling (DAS), and the system interacting with this function is not required to understand the inner implementation of the function (in programming terms, `is_data_available()` can be considered as an interface method where the implementation may change over time).

To learn more about the changes, see the consensus-specs:

- [is_data_available](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/deneb/fork-choice.md#is_data_available)
- [BeaconBlockBody](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/deneb/beacon-chain.md#beaconblockbody)
- [p2p network](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/deneb/p2p-interface.md#why-are-blobs-relayed-as-a-sidecar-separate-from-beacon-blocks)

### 2. Custom types

| Name            | SSZ equivalent | Description              |
| --------------- | -------------- | ------------------------ |
| `VersionedHash` | `Bytes32`      | _[New in Deneb:EIP4844]_ |
| `BlobIndex`     | `uint64`       | _[New in Deneb:EIP4844]_ |

### 3. Inclusion of KZG Committment versioned hashes

The Consensus Layer (CL, also called Beacon chain) calls the [`process_execution_payload`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/deneb/beacon-chain.md#modified-process_execution_payload) function when a new block payload is submitted to the chain. This function is responsible to perform some validity checks on the block's payload and then invoke the Execution Layer (EL) via the `verify_and_notify_new_payload` function.

Once invoked, the EL will:

- validate the block payload
- execute transactions inside the block payload
- update the state, which is the result of executing transactions
- build the new block
- return the new block to the CL

With EIP-4844, the `process_execution_payload` adds the parameter `versioned_hashes` to be passed to the `verify_and_notify_new_payload` function.

`versioned_hashes` is an array of [hashes](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/deneb/beacon-chain.md#modified-process_execution_payload) for each blob of KZG Committment, which are a type of cryptographic commitment particularly useful for their efficiency in creating and verifying proofs of data availability and correctness.

KZG commitments provide the ability to prove that specific pieces of data are included in the set without revealing the entire dataset. This is particularly useful for scalability solutions because it does not require for every node to store the whole blockchain to prove transactions correcteness.

### 4. New Block Header checks

TODO
see go-ethereum file consensus.go also mentioned in [week2](https://youtu.be/pniTkWo70OY?t=2773)
