docs/wiki/research/scaling/scaling.md, before:

# Scaling

In computer systems, scalability refers to the ability of a system to perform well under increased or expanding workloads. The primary purpose of blockchain is to handle users' transactions and manage network's ledger state. An increase in workload may result from either a higher demand for transactions by existing users or an increase in the volume of users.

> **Scalability of a blockchain system can be defined as its capacity to process increasing volumes operations, i.e. more transactions without raising demands on network node operators**.

## Scalability Limits

For each block included in the chain, a general agreement on its validity must be reached among a certain percentage of validator nodes, the consensus mechanism is the methodology to achieve this agreement. The **block latency** is the time that takes to a valid block to be included in the chain.
Ethereum uses a proof-of-stake (PoS) based consensus protocol known as [Gasper](https://eips.ethereum.org/assets/eip-2982/arxiv-2003.03052-Combining-GHOST-and-Casper.pdf) with an ideal block latency fixed in the specification by the constant `SECONDS_PER_SLOT` (12 seconds), however real block latency could be slightly different since blocks could be missed by a specific validator and not to be included in a specific slot.

Another fundamental blockchain design parameter is the **block size** that is the limit on the amount of data that can be stored in a single block. Ethereum has a config parameter called `gas_limit` to cap the computational effort needed to process a block, which effectively also limits the size of a block. Each operation that takes place within Ethereum, requires a certain amount of "gas" to complete. The total amount of gas for all operations within a block can't exceed Ethereum's `gas_limit`. This approach ensures the network's processing capacity isn't overextended. [EIP-1559](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1559) defines Ethereum gas pricing mechanism that allows to dynamically adjust the block size to deal with transient network congestions (without never exceed the limit of 30M gas units) and incentivize the network to target a gas amount defined by `gas_target` (15M). A gas limitation restricts the number of transactions (and their computational complexity) that can be included in an Ethereum block.

The block latency and block size directly determine the transactional throughput of the blockchain, which is measured by the **TPS** (transactions per second) metric. Block latency can be influenced by a variety of factors, such as the computational power of the network nodes, the complexity of the consensus mechanism, the network traffic congestion and the block size. Hence, a network made up of a few high-performance nodes tightly connected to each other and using large block sizes can result in an exceptional blockchain with high TPS and remarkably low block latency. However, such a network would likely be highly centralized and require users to make significant trust assumptions.

Another obstacle to decentralization is the size of the blockchain state. **The property of data being accessible when it is needed is known as data availability**. Availability of state data must be guaranteed, including availability of enough data to allow any new node in the network to reconstruct the latest version of the blockchain without any trust assumptions. Have to hold all the data to guarantee data availability can result in high storage requirements for nodes and a lengthy synchronization process for new ones, which can hinder decentralization. Handling a large amount of data is also problematic in terms of network congestion and will require demanding high connection bandwidth from node operators. Ethereum discourages the indiscriminate state growth by making operations that read or write state very expensive.

Note the tight relationship between the design and tuning of a blockchain (consensus mechanics, node requirements, state structure and size… ) and its capabilities of decentralization. High hardware or network bandwidth requirements to run a node result in harsh and expensive conditions that make it difficult to do so, directly impacting the number of nodes a blockchain will have. **To ensure decentralization, it is essential to make running a node affordable and feasible for everyone and incentivize users to do it**.

As part of the game-theory mechanism, to maintain the network sustainability, users must pay a fee to include their transactions. In Ethereum the price of fees is determined by the base fee of the protocol, the amount of gas consumed by a specific transaction and a priority market, those who pay higher priority fees are prioritized. Due to limited TPS, including a transaction in a high decentralized blockchain like Ethereum has become a valuable service. An increase transaction demand for a limited and fixed TPS raises fees to the network usability threshold and requires sacrificing decentralization and/or security in order to scale.

> **Recalling the definition of scalability, classical blockchain systems are not scalable for mass adoption without sacrificing certain levels of decentralization.**

This problem is widely known as the **Blockchain Trilemma**, which states that blockchain networks must sacrifice either security, decentralization, or scalability, and maximizing all three at once is difficult. The holy grail of blockchain technology is to create a secure and decentralized transactional network that can achieve a high TPS rate.

!["Blockchain trilemma - Bankless.com"](../img/scaling/blockchain-trilemma.png "Blockchain trilemma - Bankless.com")

## Blockchain Modularity

Modern blockchain designs propose a "divide et impera" approach dividing the system into different specific functional components to independently maximize each vertex of the trilemma. This approach encapsulates the complexity in each part of the system and reduces the systemic complexity through the definition of simpler interaction interfaces for system components.
Functional components of a blockchain:

- Consensus: Agreement mechanics among nodes of block building and transaction ordering.
- Execution: Transaction execution mechanics that define the state evolution.
- Data availability: Data availability mechanics that ensures that the data is available to be queried when it is required.
- Settlement: Mechanics that guarantee the finality and immutability of transactions.

Modular blockchain approach suggests dividing a blockchain system into different logical layers. This results in a design with reduced systemic complexity, and simpler components that can be more easily optimized and re-engineered to introduce new scaling solutions.

## Scaling Ethereum

The primary objective of Ethereum's scalability efforts is to increase TPS metric without compromising decentralization or security.

Layer 1 scaling is the set of all those techniques that increases the TPS of the underlying blockchain protocol itself. A naive solution to scaling would be using blockchains with "bigger blocks" that can reach higher TPS numbers. The problem with this approach is that increasing the number of transactions to be verified in a given time period would lead to a scenario where only a limited number of node operators with powerful enough hardware would join the network and thus would likely lead to more centralization. For this reason, an increase in the capacity of each block must be accompanied by various modifications to the protocol that allow decentralization to be maintained. Examples of layer 1 scaling solutions include Sharding, Proof-Of-Stake consensus mechanisms, and protocol upgrades aimed at optimizing block processing efficiency.

!["Layer 1 Scaling"](../img/scaling/layer-1-scaling.png "Layer 1 Scaling")

> **An increase of gas limits will effectively expand the amount of computation and data that Ethereum can hold but will also raise the demands on network node operators. Another design choice that will directly affect the block size is the gas pricing of operations. Cheaper operations will allow the inclusion of a greater number of and more complex transactions within the same gas limits boundary.**

Layer 2 scaling is the set of solutions built on top of Layer 1 blockchain protocols that can achieve a higher TPS without requiring an increase in Layer 1 resource consumption, while still relying on its security model. These solutions typically process transactions off-chain or by using alternative consensus mechanisms that are faster and more scalable than the main blockchain. Examples of Layer 2 scaling solutions include, State Channels, Plasma Chains, or Rollups.

!["Layer 2 Scaling"](../img/scaling/layer-2-scaling.png "Layer 2 Scaling")

The solution predominantly adopted by the Ethereum community to solve the scalability problem is a multi-rollup-centric approach. Here, Ethereum acts as fundamental secure layer of Settlement, and Data Availability, while the majority of Execution tasks are delegated to upper layers referred to as Rollups. Rollups bundle multiple Layer 2 transactions into a single Layer 1 transaction. These transactions are stored in Layer 1, but their execution is delegated to off-chain mechanisms. This allows for significant scalability improvements without sacrificing security. Ethereum's high level of programmability makes possible to create scalable solutions on top of the platform through Ethereum smart contracts. As previously mentioned, to maintain a high level of decentralization, Ethereum imposes limitations on the computational and storage resources that transactions included in the blocks can use, through gas limitations. Therefore, the data stored in Layer 1 is minimized, with only raw transactions being stored along with a hash commitment of the Layer 2 state resulting from the execution of those transactions.

> **Rollups can be seen as a way to compress transaction execution, thereby reducing the computational burden on the Layer 1 blockchain. This provides the possibility to increase the TPS while still maintaining the security level of Layer 1 for the Layer 2 transactions, as their data and Layer 2 state transition commitments are stored in Layer 1.**

## Ethereum Core Changes Towards a Rollup-Centric Roadmap

See the [Next Section](/wiki/research/scaling/core-changes/core-changes.md).

### Ethereum Layer 2 scaling

## ZK Rollups

TODO

## Optimistic Rollups

TODO

## Resources:

- [Ethereum Consensus Mechanism](https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240214225609/https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms)
- [Ethereum Proof-of-Stake Consensus Specifications](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/tree/dev?tab=readme-ov-file#ethereum-proof-of-stake-consensus-specifications), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240208050731/https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/tree/dev)
- [Ethereum Proof-of-Stake Consensus Specifications](https://ethereum.github.io/consensus-specs/), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240217155014/https://ethereum.github.io/consensus-specs/)
- [Vitalik The Limits to Blockchain Scalability](https://vitalik.eth.limo/general/2021/05/23/scaling.html), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240205202358/https://vitalik.eth.limo/general/2021/05/23/scaling.html)
- [Ethereum Scaling](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240209083702/https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling)
- [An Incomplete Guide to Rollups](https://vitalik.eth.limo/general/2021/01/05/rollup.html), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240212014637/https://vitalik.eth.limo/general/2021/01/05/rollup.html)
- [Gemini Cryptopedia The Blockchain Trilemma: Fast, Secure, and Scalable Networks](https://www.gemini.com/cryptopedia/blockchain-trilemma-decentralization-scalability-definition), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240209073156/https://www.gemini.com/cryptopedia/blockchain-trilemma-decentralization-scalability-definition)
- [Combining GHOST and Casper](https://eips.ethereum.org/assets/eip-2982/arxiv-2003.03052-Combining-GHOST-and-Casper.pdf), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20230907004049/https://eips.ethereum.org/assets/eip-2982/arxiv-2003.03052-Combining-GHOST-and-Casper.pdf)
- [Ethereum Blocks](https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/blocks), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240214052915/https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/blocks)
- [On Block Sizes, Gas Limits and Scalability](https://ethresear.ch/t/on-block-sizes-gas-limits-and-scalability/18444), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240220230246/https://ethresear.ch/t/on-block-sizes-gas-limits-and-scalability/18444)

Commit message:

feat: small optimistic and zk rollup explainer

docs/wiki/research/scaling/scaling.md, after:

# Scaling

In computer systems, scalability refers to the ability of a system to perform well under increased or expanding workloads. The primary purpose of blockchain is to handle users' transactions and manage network's ledger state. An increase in workload may result from either a higher demand for transactions by existing users or an increase in the volume of users.

> **Scalability of a blockchain system can be defined as its capacity to process increasing volumes operations, i.e. more transactions without raising demands on network node operators**.

## Scalability Limits

For each block included in the chain, a general agreement on its validity must be reached among a certain percentage of validator nodes, the consensus mechanism is the methodology to achieve this agreement. The **block latency** is the time that takes to a valid block to be included in the chain.
Ethereum uses a proof-of-stake (PoS) based consensus protocol known as [Gasper](https://eips.ethereum.org/assets/eip-2982/arxiv-2003.03052-Combining-GHOST-and-Casper.pdf) with an ideal block latency fixed in the specification by the constant `SECONDS_PER_SLOT` (12 seconds), however real block latency could be slightly different since blocks could be missed by a specific validator and not to be included in a specific slot.

Another fundamental blockchain design parameter is the **block size** that is the limit on the amount of data that can be stored in a single block. Ethereum has a config parameter called `gas_limit` to cap the computational effort needed to process a block, which effectively also limits the size of a block. Each operation that takes place within Ethereum, requires a certain amount of "gas" to complete. The total amount of gas for all operations within a block can't exceed Ethereum's `gas_limit`. This approach ensures the network's processing capacity isn't overextended. [EIP-1559](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1559) defines Ethereum gas pricing mechanism that allows to dynamically adjust the block size to deal with transient network congestions (without never exceed the limit of 30M gas units) and incentivize the network to target a gas amount defined by `gas_target` (15M). A gas limitation restricts the number of transactions (and their computational complexity) that can be included in an Ethereum block.

The block latency and block size directly determine the transactional throughput of the blockchain, which is measured by the **TPS** (transactions per second) metric. Block latency can be influenced by a variety of factors, such as the computational power of the network nodes, the complexity of the consensus mechanism, the network traffic congestion and the block size. Hence, a network made up of a few high-performance nodes tightly connected to each other and using large block sizes can result in an exceptional blockchain with high TPS and remarkably low block latency. However, such a network would likely be highly centralized and require users to make significant trust assumptions.

Another obstacle to decentralization is the size of the blockchain state. **The property of data being accessible when it is needed is known as data availability**. Availability of state data must be guaranteed, including availability of enough data to allow any new node in the network to reconstruct the latest version of the blockchain without any trust assumptions. Have to hold all the data to guarantee data availability can result in high storage requirements for nodes and a lengthy synchronization process for new ones, which can hinder decentralization. Handling a large amount of data is also problematic in terms of network congestion and will require demanding high connection bandwidth from node operators. Ethereum discourages the indiscriminate state growth by making operations that read or write state very expensive.

Note the tight relationship between the design and tuning of a blockchain (consensus mechanics, node requirements, state structure and size… ) and its capabilities of decentralization. High hardware or network bandwidth requirements to run a node result in harsh and expensive conditions that make it difficult to do so, directly impacting the number of nodes a blockchain will have. **To ensure decentralization, it is essential to make running a node affordable and feasible for everyone and incentivize users to do it**.

As part of the game-theory mechanism, to maintain the network sustainability, users must pay a fee to include their transactions. In Ethereum the price of fees is determined by the base fee of the protocol, the amount of gas consumed by a specific transaction and a priority market, those who pay higher priority fees are prioritized. Due to limited TPS, including a transaction in a high decentralized blockchain like Ethereum has become a valuable service. An increase transaction demand for a limited and fixed TPS raises fees to the network usability threshold and requires sacrificing decentralization and/or security in order to scale.

> **Recalling the definition of scalability, classical blockchain systems are not scalable for mass adoption without sacrificing certain levels of decentralization.**

This problem is widely known as the **Blockchain Trilemma**, which states that blockchain networks must sacrifice either security, decentralization, or scalability, and maximizing all three at once is difficult. The holy grail of blockchain technology is to create a secure and decentralized transactional network that can achieve a high TPS rate.

!["Blockchain trilemma - Bankless.com"](../img/scaling/blockchain-trilemma.png "Blockchain trilemma - Bankless.com")

## Blockchain Modularity

Modern blockchain designs propose a "divide et impera" approach dividing the system into different specific functional components to independently maximize each vertex of the trilemma. This approach encapsulates the complexity in each part of the system and reduces the systemic complexity through the definition of simpler interaction interfaces for system components.
Functional components of a blockchain:

- Consensus: Agreement mechanics among nodes of block building and transaction ordering.
- Execution: Transaction execution mechanics that define the state evolution.
- Data availability: Data availability mechanics that ensures that the data is available to be queried when it is required.
- Settlement: Mechanics that guarantee the finality and immutability of transactions.

Modular blockchain approach suggests dividing a blockchain system into different logical layers. This results in a design with reduced systemic complexity, and simpler components that can be more easily optimized and re-engineered to introduce new scaling solutions.

## Scaling Ethereum

The primary objective of Ethereum's scalability efforts is to increase TPS metric without compromising decentralization or security.

Layer 1 scaling is the set of all those techniques that increases the TPS of the underlying blockchain protocol itself. A naive solution to scaling would be using blockchains with "bigger blocks" that can reach higher TPS numbers. The problem with this approach is that increasing the number of transactions to be verified in a given time period would lead to a scenario where only a limited number of node operators with powerful enough hardware would join the network and thus would likely lead to more centralization. For this reason, an increase in the capacity of each block must be accompanied by various modifications to the protocol that allow decentralization to be maintained. Examples of layer 1 scaling solutions include Sharding, Proof-Of-Stake consensus mechanisms, and protocol upgrades aimed at optimizing block processing efficiency.

!["Layer 1 Scaling"](../img/scaling/layer-1-scaling.png "Layer 1 Scaling")

> **An increase of gas limits will effectively expand the amount of computation and data that Ethereum can hold but will also raise the demands on network node operators. Another design choice that will directly affect the block size is the gas pricing of operations. Cheaper operations will allow the inclusion of a greater number of and more complex transactions within the same gas limits boundary.**

Layer 2 scaling is the set of solutions built on top of Layer 1 blockchain protocols that can achieve a higher TPS without requiring an increase in Layer 1 resource consumption, while still relying on its security model. These solutions typically process transactions off-chain or by using alternative consensus mechanisms that are faster and more scalable than the main blockchain. Examples of Layer 2 scaling solutions include, State Channels, Plasma Chains, or Rollups.

!["Layer 2 Scaling"](../img/scaling/layer-2-scaling.png "Layer 2 Scaling")

The solution predominantly adopted by the Ethereum community to solve the scalability problem is a multi-rollup-centric approach. Here, Ethereum acts as fundamental secure layer of Settlement, and Data Availability, while the majority of Execution tasks are delegated to upper layers referred to as Rollups. Rollups bundle multiple Layer 2 transactions into a single Layer 1 transaction. These transactions are stored in Layer 1, but their execution is delegated to off-chain mechanisms. This allows for significant scalability improvements without sacrificing security. Ethereum's high level of programmability makes possible to create scalable solutions on top of the platform through Ethereum smart contracts. As previously mentioned, to maintain a high level of decentralization, Ethereum imposes limitations on the computational and storage resources that transactions included in the blocks can use, through gas limitations. Therefore, the data stored in Layer 1 is minimized, with only raw transactions being stored along with a hash commitment of the Layer 2 state resulting from the execution of those transactions.

> **Rollups can be seen as a way to compress transaction execution, thereby reducing the computational burden on the Layer 1 blockchain. This provides the possibility to increase the TPS while still maintaining the security level of Layer 1 for the Layer 2 transactions, as their data and Layer 2 state transition commitments are stored in Layer 1.**

## Ethereum Core Changes Towards a Rollup-Centric Roadmap

See the [Next Section](/wiki/research/scaling/core-changes/core-changes.md).

## Ethereum Layer 2 scaling

Given the current rollup-centric roadmap, multiple Layer 2 networks have emerged. These can be categorized into two main groups based on their security model: optimistic rollups and zk-rollups.

Both solutions have their own advantages, drawbacks, and unique tech stacks. However, they share a few core components:
  - Onchain contracts: These control the various rollups and may include smart contracts that track user deposits, monitor state updates, and more.
  - Offchain virtual machines (VMs): Usually a modified EVM-compatible chain that executes transactions.

Ethereum acts as both a data availability (DA) layer and a settlement layer, meaning that Layer 2s inherit the security of Layer 1. Once a rollup transaction is committed to Ethereum’s base layer, it cannot be rolled back.

### Optimistic Rollups

Optimistic rollups emerged as a way to improve transaction throughput while still relying on cryptoeconomic incentives to inherit Ethereum's security.
Their verification model is based on a technique called optimistic verification—every transaction submitted to Layer 1 is assumed to be valid by default.
An entity called an operator or aggregator submits a batch of L2 transactions to Layer 1 in a process called anchoring. After that, there is a challenge period, during which anyone can dispute the validity of a transaction batch by submitting a fraud proof.
If a challenge is successful, the challenger is rewarded, and the operator is penalized through a process called slashing. This mechanism incentivizes operators to only submit transactions that won't be challenged.

### ZK Rollups

ZK rollups are scaling solutions that enhance Ethereum’s throughput with mathematical certainty using advanced cryptographic techniques.
Transactions on the Layer 2 are bundled into batches, and a zero-knowledge proof is generated to verify their correctness. This proof is then submitted to Layer 1, where it is verified. Once verified, there is mathematical assurance that all transactions in the batch are valid.
Although they're called ZK rollups due to their use of zero-knowledge proofs, the primary benefit is actually succinctness—the ability to produce a compact proof that is much smaller than the actual size of all the transactions.
There are two main types of zero-knowledge proof systems used in practice, zk-SNARKs(Zero-Knowledge Succinct Non-Interactive Argument of Knowledge) and zk-STARKs(Zero-Knowledge Scalable Transparent Argument of Knowledge).  
zk-SNARKs currently have broader adoption in the ZK rollup landscape, but zk-STARKs are gaining momentum due to their scalability and lack of a trusted setup.

## Resources:

- [Ethereum Consensus Mechanism](https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240214225609/https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms)
- [Ethereum Proof-of-Stake Consensus Specifications](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/tree/dev?tab=readme-ov-file#ethereum-proof-of-stake-consensus-specifications), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240208050731/https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/tree/dev)
- [Ethereum Proof-of-Stake Consensus Specifications](https://ethereum.github.io/consensus-specs/), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240217155014/https://ethereum.github.io/consensus-specs/)
- [Vitalik The Limits to Blockchain Scalability](https://vitalik.eth.limo/general/2021/05/23/scaling.html), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240205202358/https://vitalik.eth.limo/general/2021/05/23/scaling.html)
- [Ethereum Scaling](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240209083702/https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling)
- [An Incomplete Guide to Rollups](https://vitalik.eth.limo/general/2021/01/05/rollup.html), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240212014637/https://vitalik.eth.limo/general/2021/01/05/rollup.html)
- [Gemini Cryptopedia The Blockchain Trilemma: Fast, Secure, and Scalable Networks](https://www.gemini.com/cryptopedia/blockchain-trilemma-decentralization-scalability-definition), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240209073156/https://www.gemini.com/cryptopedia/blockchain-trilemma-decentralization-scalability-definition)
- [Combining GHOST and Casper](https://eips.ethereum.org/assets/eip-2982/arxiv-2003.03052-Combining-GHOST-and-Casper.pdf), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20230907004049/https://eips.ethereum.org/assets/eip-2982/arxiv-2003.03052-Combining-GHOST-and-Casper.pdf)
- [Ethereum Blocks](https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/blocks), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240214052915/https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/blocks)
- [On Block Sizes, Gas Limits and Scalability](https://ethresear.ch/t/on-block-sizes-gas-limits-and-scalability/18444), [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20240220230246/https://ethresear.ch/t/on-block-sizes-gas-limits-and-scalability/18444)
- [L2beat: an overview of all L2 rollups](https://l2beat.com/scaling/summary)
